---
layout: post
title:  "The Road to a Prototype. 5. Rendering."
date:   2017-05-05
tags: ['article', 'prototyping', 'roguelike', 'sdl', 'renderer', 'memory']
author: "Hugo Viala"
---

Welcome to *The Road to a Protoype*, a blog series in which I weekly describe my attempt at prototyping a small game all by myself.

# Previously in...

Last week, I implemented a very basic UI for the inventory system. This inventory displayed *very* basic info about weapons and items hold by the player. The way to render this screen felt kind of clumsy and I thought it was time to have a somewhat decent renderer in our hand.

# SDL Rendering

The current prototype uses SDL for things such as creating and managing the window, receiving the user input, counting time and rendering on the screen[^1]. Rendering in SDL is pretty simple if you do not use OpenGL or hardware acceleration. You have a basic structure, called a SDL_Renderer, which is passed around each time you want something to be displayed on the screen. For example, here are a few functions that are used to render lines, points, rects or bitmaps on the screen :

{% highlight c++ %}
int SDL_RenderClear(SDL_Renderer* renderer);
int SDL_RenderDrawLine(SDL_Renderer* renderer, int x1, int y1, int x2, int y2);
int SDL_RenderDrawRect(SDL_Renderer* renderer, const SDL_Rect* rect);
int SDL_RenderFillRect(SDL_Renderer* renderer, const SDL_Rect* rect);
int SDL_RenderCopyEx(SDL_Renderer* renderer, SDL_Texture* texture, 
     const SDL_Rect* srcrect, const SDL_Rect* dstrect, 
     const double angle, const SDL_Point* center, const SDL_RendererFlip flip);
{% endhighlight %}

It is pretty straightforward. You just pass the SDL context renderer and what you want drawn (in window coordinates), you *present* it to the screen and then you are done.

But up to now, gameplay code and SDL rendering code where mixed. This is ok for very short term, but surely, for middle / long term thinking, I could do something better quite easily.

# Basic renderer philosophy

I think there is something subtle to bear in mind when approaching the renderer philosophy: render often happens after the game state has been updated. But sometimes, render commands have to be given at game-update time. For example, if the player pressed the **I** button, then it should trigger inventory rendering.

The solution to this problem was beautifully demonstrated once again by Mr. Muratori in Handmade Hero[^2]. The basic idea is the following :

1. The Renderer is basically a buffer.
2. This buffer can hold rendering commands. For example, a command for clearing the screen, a command for drawing a rect or displaying text even.
3. Whenever the user wishes so, he can push a rendering command into the renderer's buffer.
4. At the end of a game state update frame, the renderer's buffer is processed, each command is taken individually and then executed. Then the renderer's buffer is flushed.

What I find great about this system are the following points :

1. Rendering command instantiation and rendering command execution are decoupled. This means that you do not have to worry about using SDL code in your gameplay code. You just have to give the renderer the most fundamental information it needs -- such as coordinates, color, ... -- and it is the renderer's duty to convert it to the SDL context. As a user, you need to only think about rendering data, not SDL.
2. Since the command can be pre-processed before being rendered, you can simplify the user's work even further. Here are two examples :
	  1. The basic SDL window coordinates is not very intuitive (origin is top-left), you can decide that the origin of every renderer's command is bottom-left (just like in math) so that it is more intuitive for the user and change that at pre-process time to feed the SDL renderer with correct data.
	  2. You could also pre-process the command generally, for example sorting them so that you are sure that what is rendered on top is not hidden, and you could therefore cull the commands that will not appear anyway gaining precious process time.

Basically, by splitting command instantiation and command execution you have more control on your hand.

# Rendering in practice

Writing the rendering code is not very complicated, you first have to define a type for each command :

{% highlight c++ %}
enum render_command_type
{
	RenderCommand_Rect,
	RenderCommand_Circle,
	RenderCommand_Text,
	RenderCommand_Line,
	RenderCommand_RectBorder,
	RenderCommand_Clear,

	RenderCommand_Count,
};
{% endhighlight %}

A rendering command is just a union, depending on each type

{% highlight c++ %}
struct render_command
{
	render_command_type Type;
	union
	{
		struct // NOTE(hugo) : RenderCommand_Rect && RenderCommand_RectBorder
		{
			rect2 Rect;
			v4 Color;
		};
		struct // NOTE(hugo) : RenderCommand_Text
		{
			v2 P;
			char Text[128];
		};
		// NOTE(hugo) : And so on [...]
	};
};
{% endhighlight %}

And finally, a renderer is just a struct holding valuable piece of data : the number of commands, the memory allocated for the storage of this command (the memory_arena and the temporary_memory), and the SDL context.

{% highlight c++ %}
struct renderer
{
	u32 CommandCount;
	memory_arena* Arena;
	temporary_memory TemporaryMemory;
	SDL_Renderer* SDLContext;
};
{% endhighlight %}

This is also where you can store data about the sorting process, the coordinates transition, and so forth.
Now the rest is fairly easy. Each frame, the user has to reset the command count and just have to push commands onto the renderer's buffer. The basic exposed API is therefore very straightforward :

{% highlight c++ %}
void PushCommand(renderer* Renderer, render_command Command)
{
	render_command* PushedCommand = PushStruct(Renderer->Arena, render_command);
	*PushedCommand = Command;
	++Renderer->CommandCount;
}

void PushRect(renderer* Renderer, rect2 Rect, v4 Color)
{
	render_command Command = {};
	Command.Type = RenderCommand_Rect;
	Command.Rect = Rect;
	Command.Color = Color;

	PushCommand(Renderer, Command);
}

void PushClear(renderer* Renderer, v4 Color)
{
	render_command Command = {};
	Command.Type = RenderCommand_Clear;
	Command.ClearColor = Color;

	PushCommand(Renderer, Command);
}
{% endhighlight %}

And, before the very end of the frame, after all game state update have been performed, you just have to call the very simple Render function. This function goes through each render command and call the corresponding SDL context call.

{% highlight c++ %}
void Render(renderer* Renderer)
{
	for(u32 CommandIndex = 0; CommandIndex < Renderer->CommandCount; ++CommandIndex)
	{
		render_command* Command = (render_command *)Renderer->Arena->Base + CommandIndex;
		switch(Command->Type)
		{
			case RenderCommand_Clear:
				{
					SDLSetRenderColor(Renderer->SDLContext, 
								Command->ClearColor);
					SDL_RenderClear(Renderer->SDLContext);
				} break;
			case RenderCommand_Rect:
				{
					v2 CommandRectSize = RectSize(Command->Rect);
					SDL_Rect CommandRect = {};
					CommandRect.x = Command->Rect.Min.x;
					CommandRect.y = Command->Rect.Min.y;
					CommandRect.w = CommandRectSize.x;
					CommandRect.h = CommandRectSize.y;
					SDLSetRenderColor(Renderer->SDLContext, Command->Color);
					SDL_RenderFillRect(Renderer->SDLContext, &CommandRect);
				} break;
			// NOTE(hugo) : And so on [...]
		}
	}

	SDL_RenderPresent(Renderer->SDLContext);
}
{% endhighlight %}

Which is code that the user does not have to think about. 

Another very powerful aspect of this code is that it can be very easily adapted for another renderer framework. If I decide to switch to SFML rendering one day, all the rendering code I need to change is just in one place : naming the Render function, whereas it was previously spread out in the code base. This is therefore a very sane step that has been taken this week.

# Where to go from here ?

The new renderer gives more flexibility for the user since it allows to stop thinking about SDL rendering code entirely. Dependency can be a big issue further on and it definitively feels great to have a finite, reusable component.

Also the idea behind this rendering system is fairly simple : you allocate some amount of memory to store the rendering command you will push during a frame, then the renderer process them and ask for SDL to display them on screen.

With a more solid rendering basis, I feel more confident moving on to other parts of the prototype. For the past few posts, I said that bigger maps was the way to go, but I keep pushing it for later. I am going to begin modelling the fight system which is an important part of the game design and of the user experience for the game.

---
[^1]: Even though my prototype uses SDL, most of this rendering philosophy can *very* easily be adapted to another framework such as SFML, Win32, GLFW, ...
[^2]: [Handmade Hero Rendering Playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLEMXAbCVnmY40lfaaowTqIs_dKNgOXR5Q)
